Add proposal for Power VS infra creation (#1488)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api-provider-ibmcloud: docs/proposal/20231109-powervs-infra-creation.md

	NetworkID *string `json:"networkID,omitempty"`

	// dhcpServerID is the reference to the Power VS DHCP server.
	DHCPServerID *string `json:"dhcpServerID,omitempty"`

	// vpcID is reference to IBM Cloud VPC resources.
	VPCID *string `json:"vpcID,omitempty"`

	// vpcSubnetID is reference to IBM Cloud VPC subnet.
	VPCSubnetID *string `json:"vpcSubnetID,omitempty"`

	// transitGatewayID is reference to IBM Cloud TransitGateway.
	TransitGatewayID *string `json:"transitGatewayID,omitempty"`

	// ControlPlaneLoadBalancer reference to IBM Cloud VPC Loadbalancer.
	ControlPlaneLoadBalancer *VPCLoadBalancerStatus `json:"controlPlaneLoadBalancer,omitempty"`

	// Conditions defines current service state of the IBMPowerVSCluster.
	Conditions capiv1beta1.Conditions `json:"conditions,omitempty"`
}

// IBMTransitGatewayResource holds the TransitGateway information.
type IBMTransitGatewayResource struct {
	Name *string `json:"name,omitempty"`
	ID   *string `json:"id,omitempty"`
}
```
### Following resources will be created
1. Power VS workspace
2. Power VS Network [DHCP service]
3. VPC :
4. VPC Subnet
5. Transit gateway
6. Loadbalancer

### Cluster creation workflow

> ![img_4.png](../images/powervs-workflow.png)

Reviewer: Lets use tools like https://excalidraw.com which allows to save the spec file as well so that someone also can easily modify the content later

> 

Reviewer: Lets add delete flow as well

	NetworkID *string `json:"networkID,omitempty"`

	// vpcID is reference to IBM Cloud VPC resources.
	VpcID *string `json:"vpcID,omitempty"`

	// vpcSubnetID is reference to IBM Cloud VPC subnet.
	VPCSubnetID *string `json:"vpcSubnetID,omitempty"`

	// transitGatewayID is reference to IBM Cloud TransitGateway.
	TransitGatewayID *string `json:"transitGatewayID,omitempty"`

	// ControlPlaneLoadBalancer reference to IBM Cloud VPC Loadbalancer.
	ControlPlaneLoadBalancer *VPCLoadBalancerStatus `json:"controlPlaneLoadBalancer,omitempty"`

	// Conditions defines current service state of the IBMPowerVSCluster.
	Conditions capiv1beta1.Conditions `json:"conditions,omitempty"`
}

// VPCResource holds the VPC information.
type VPCResource struct {
	// Name of VPC
	// +optional
	Name string `json:"name"`

	// IBM Cloud VPC zone where the cluster's loadbalancers will be created
	Zone string `json:"vpcZone"`

	// Subnet contains the details about subnet
	Subnet Subnet `json:"subnet"`
}

type TransitGateway struct {
	Name *string `json:"name,omitempty"`
	ID   *string `json:"id,omitempty"`
}
```
### Following resources will be created
1. Power VS workspace
2. Power VS Network [DHCP service]

> 3. VPC :

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. VPC
```
minor nit

+ @Karthik-K-N also please update the proposed API changes doc with final changes as discussed (fields marked optional, omitempty)

Reviewer 2: + also add `omitempty` marker to all the newly introduced optional fields to maintain consistency (same applies for the other PR)

Author: Once the API review PR looks good will copy over the data structure here to be on sych, Does this work?

Reviewer 2: sounds good to me.

	// supported serviceInstance identifier in PowerVSResource are Name and ID and that can be obtained from IBM Cloud UI or IBM Cloud cli.
	// More detail about Power VS service instance.
	// https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/power-iaas?topic=power-iaas-creating-power-virtual-server
	// when omitted system will dynamically create the service instance
	// +optional
	ServiceInstance *IBMPowerVSResourceReference `json:"serviceInstance,omitempty"`

	// zone is the name of Power VS zone where the cluster will be created
	// possible values can be found here https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/power-iaas?topic=power-iaas-creating-power-virtual-server.
	// when value for serviceInstance is omitted its required to set the value for zone.
	// +optional
	Zone *string `json:"zone,omitempty"`

	// resourceGroup name under which the resources will be created.
	// when omitted Default resource group will be used.
	// +optional
	ResourceGroup *string `json:"resourceGroup,omitempty"`

	// vpc contains information about IBM Cloud VPC resources
	// +optional
	VPC *VPCResourceReference `json:"vpc,omitempty"`

	// vpcSubnet contains information about IBM Cloud VPC Subnet resources
	// +optional

> 	VPCSubnet *Subnet `json:"vpcSubnet,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: Update
```suggestion
	VPCSubnets []Subnet `json:"vpcSubnets,omitempty"`
```

	// transitGateway contains information about IBM Cloud TransitGateway.
	// +optional
	TransitGateway *TransitGateway `json:"transitGateway,omitempty"`

	// loadBalancers is optional configuration for configuring loadbalancers to control plane or data plane nodes.
	// +optional
	LoadBalancers []VPCLoadBalancerSpec `json:"loadBalancers,omitempty"`

	// cosBucket contains options to configure a supporting IBM Cloud COS bucket for this
	// cluster - currently used for nodes requiring Ignition
	// (https://coreos.github.io/ignition/) for bootstrapping (requires
	// BootstrapFormatIgnition feature flag to be enabled).
	// +optional

> 	CosBucket *CosBucket `json:"cosBucket,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	CosInstance *CosInstance `json:"cosInstance,omitempty"`
```
update the comments as well

	// Conditions defines current service state of the IBMPowerVSCluster.
	Conditions capiv1beta1.Conditions `json:"conditions,omitempty"`
}

// ResourceReference identifies a resource with id.
type ResourceReference struct {
	// id represents the id of the resource.
	ID *string `json:"id,omitempty"`
	// +kubebuilder:default=false
	// controllerCreated indicates whether the resource is created by the controller.
	ControllerCreated *bool `json:"controllerCreated,omitempty"`
}

// TransitGateway holds the TransitGateway information.
type TransitGateway struct {
	Name *string `json:"name,omitempty"`
	ID   *string `json:"id,omitempty"`
}

// VPCResourceReference is a reference to a specific VPC resource by ID or Name
// Only one of ID or Name may be specified. Specifying more than one will result in
// a validation error.
type VPCResourceReference struct {
	// ID of resource
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
	// +optional
	ID *string `json:"id,omitempty"`

	// Name of resource
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
	// +optional
	Name *string `json:"name,omitempty"`

	// IBM Cloud VPC zone
	Zone *string `json:"zone,omitempty"`
}

> type CosBucket struct {

Reviewer 2: Update as per latest API changes.

Author: I will update this by eod

> # Dynamically create infrastructure required for Power VS cluster

Reviewer 2: nit: Power VS --> PowerVS (Fix everywhere)

## Motivation

> Currently, inorder to create Power VS cluster using cluster api we need to create few resources in hand which includes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, inorder to create  a PowerVS cluster using cluster api we need to create few resources as prerequisites which includes -
```

> 1. Creating a Power VS workspace

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Creating a PowerVS Workspace
```

2. Creating a Power VS Network
3. Creating a port on network

> as this involves some prerequisite work which is limiting true capabilities of cluster api.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As this involves some prerequisite work which is limiting the true capabilities of cluster api.
```

Along the similar line today the cluster is accessible to end user via external ip and which is loadbalanced on controlplanes using kube-vip.

## Goal

> 1. Dynamically creating required cloud resources as a part of cluster creation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Dynamically create the required cloud resources as part of the cluster creation process.
```

> 2. Allowing users to access the cluster via loadbalacer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Allow users to access the cluster via loadbalancer.
```

	Network IBMPowerVSResourceReference `json:"network"`

	// ControlPlaneEndpoint represents the endpoint used to communicate with the control plane.
	// +optional
	ControlPlaneEndpoint capiv1beta1.APIEndpoint `json:"controlPlaneEndpoint"`

	// serviceInstance is the reference to the Power VS server workspace on which the server instance(VM) will be created.
	// Power VS server workspace is a container for all Power VS instances at a specific geographic region.
	// serviceInstance can be created via IBM Cloud catalog or CLI.
	// supported serviceInstance identifier in PowerVSResource are Name and ID and that can be obtained from IBM Cloud UI or IBM Cloud cli.
	// More detail about Power VS service instance.
	// https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/power-iaas?topic=power-iaas-creating-power-virtual-server
	// when omitted system will dynamically create the service instance
	// +optional
	ServiceInstance *IBMPowerVSResourceReference `json:"serviceInstance,omitempty"`

	// zone is the name of Power VS zone where the cluster will be created
	// possible values can be found here https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/power-iaas?topic=power-iaas-creating-power-virtual-server.

> 	// when omitted syd04 will be set as default zone.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	// when omitted dal10 will be set as default zone.
```
(change in actual API file as well)

	ID *string `json:"id,omitempty"`

	// Name of resource
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
	// +optional
	Name *string `json:"name,omitempty"`

	// IBM Cloud VPC region
	Region *string `json:"region,omitempty"`
}

// CosInstance represents IBM Cloud COS instance.
type CosInstance struct {
	// PresignedURLDuration defines the duration for which presigned URLs are valid.
	//
	// This is used to generate presigned URLs for S3 Bucket objects, which are used by
	// control-plane and worker nodes to fetch bootstrap data.
	//
	// When enabled, the IAM instance profiles specified are not used.
	// +optional
	PresignedURLDuration *metav1.Duration `json:"presignedURLDuration,omitempty"`

	// Name defines name of IBM cloud COS instance to be created.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength:=3
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength:=63
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^[a-z0-9][a-z0-9.-]{1,61}[a-z0-9]$`
	Name string `json:"name,omitempty"`

	// bucketName is IBM cloud COS bucket name
	BucketName string `json:"bucketName,omitempty"`

	// bucketRegion is IBM cloud COS bucket region
	BucketRegion string `json:"bucketRegion,omitempty"`
}

```

### Following resources will be created

> 1. [Power VS workspace](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/power-iaas?topic=power-iaas-creating-power-virtual-server)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. [PowerVS Workspace](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/power-iaas?topic=power-iaas-creating-power-virtual-server)
```

2. [Power VS Network](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/power-iaas?topic=power-iaas-configuring-subnet) [DHCP service]
3. [VPC](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/vpc?topic=vpc-about-vpc)
4. [VPC Subnet](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/vpc?topic=vpc-about-networking-for-vpc)

> 5. [Transit gateway](https://www.ibm.com/products/transit-gateway)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. [Transit Gateway](https://www.ibm.com/products/transit-gateway)
```

6. [VPC Loadbalancer](https://www.ibm.com/products/load-balancer)

### Cluster creation workflow

> User is expected to set the annotation ```powervs.cluster.x-k8s.io/create-infra:true``` to IBMPowerVSCluser object make use of this feature. If unset the cluster creation goes through existing way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
User is expected to set the annotation ```powervs.cluster.x-k8s.io/create-infra:true``` to IBMPowerVSCluser object to make use of this feature. If not set the cluster creation will proceed with existing way.
```

> User can specify the existing resources in spec, When specified controller will take care of using the specified resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
User can specify the existing resources in spec, When specified controller will take care of reusing those resources.
```

When the resource is not set or provided resource with name does not exist in cloud, the controller will create the resource in cloud.

### Cluster Deletion workflow

> The controller will only delete the resources which is created by it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The controller will only delete the resources which are created by it.
```
